---
layout: post
date: 2023-05-17 17:20:28 +00:00
title: "s3tree: viewing a tree of objects in S3 in my terminal"
summary: A script to give me a quick overview of some objects in a hierarchical view.
tags:
  - aws:amazon s3
  - aws
  - drawing things
link: https://github.com/alexwlchan/scripts/blob/main/aws/s3tree.py
colors:
  index_light: "#005400"
  css_light:   "#005400"
  index_dark:  "#67AA7E"
  css_dark:    "#67AA7E"
---

{% comment %}
  Cover photo from https://www.pexels.com/photo/tall-green-trees-2154617/
{% endcomment %}

I've been doing a bunch of work to clear up some old S3 buckets, and I wanted a quick way to see what's in a given prefix or bucket.
I found the console a bit slow, because you can only see one folder at a time, so I wrote a command-line tool that prints a tree in my terminal:

{%
  picture
  filename="s3tree.png"
  width="568"
  alt="A screenshot of my terminal after running the command `s3tree s3://wellcomecollection-storage/digitised/b21466154`. It shows a hierarchical tree with several nested folders, and under each folder is a list of object names and then '...N other objects'. The object names are shown in blue; the folder names are underlined with a dashed line because they're hyperlinks."
%}

This isn't a complete listing -- it just prints the first few objects in each folder, so I can get a sense of what's in there.
The objects I was looking at have a pretty regular naming structure, so that's plenty.

It's particularly useful when I have several layers of nested folders -- this is much easier than clicking back and forth in the console.

There are a few neat tricks in here:

*   The folder names are clickable links to the S3 console, so I can dig into the contents in more detail.
    I found a [Gist by Egmont Koblinger][gist] which describes how to do hyperlinks in terminal emulators, which made it easy to get this working -- and I've already used this technique in a couple of other places.

*   I work with buckets in several AWS accounts, and normally I have to pick my credentials with an `AWS_PROFILE` environment variable or something similar.
    But this script looks at the bucket name, works out which account it's in, then selects the right credentials.

    (This is based on a manually populated mapping of bucket to account; I don't think you can get the AWS account ID given an arbitrary bucket name.)

*   Although S3 object keys are sorted alphabetically, I'm using the [naturalsort package] to reorder the keys into natural ordering.
    This is particularly useful with some of the numeric-like keys I deal with; the zero padding isn't always consistent.
    Using natural sorting makes the object summaries easier to skim.

If this might be useful to you, I've [put the script on GitHub](https://github.com/alexwlchan/scripts/blob/main/aws/s3tree.py).
I'm especially pleased with the tree-printing code, which is reused from another script and I expect to reuse again -- a way to display hierarchical data in a terminal could have all sorts of uses.

[gist]: https://gist.github.com/egmontkob/eb114294efbcd5adb1944c9f3cb5feda
[naturalsort package]: https://pypi.org/project/naturalsort/
