---
layout: post
date: 2023-06-18 10:19:04 +00:00
title: Writing a Mac app to review my photos
summary: Dipping my toes into SwiftUI to make a tool for reviewing my photos with just the keyboard.
tags:
  - photo management
  - swift
  - "swift:swiftui"
colors:
  css_light: "#3e8036"
  css_dark:  "#70e662"
index:
  feature: true
---

I take a lot of photos.
When I'm trying to get a particular shot, I'll often take multiple pictures in the hope of getting at least one that's good – and then my camera roll is full of similar images.

I always intend to go back and clean up my pictures afterwards -- pick the best version of each shot, and delete all the rest.
In practice, I've struggled to do this review step -- I had no good way to track my progress, to know what I'd already reviewed and what was new.

Recently, I made myself a little Mac app to make it easier to review my photos. I see all my pictures in a horizontally scrolling list, I can go back and forth with the arrow keys, and I can use the keyboard to review a photo into one of three states.

{%
  picture
  filename="blink-screenshot.png"
  width="750"
  alt="Screenshot of the app, which is a single window. Most of the window is taken up by a large photo of a field which is bare soil, ready to be planted. There's a large sprinkler in the field, which is casting a narrow rainbow in its spray. At the top of the screen is a horizontally scrolling list of small thumbnails, which show alternative shots of this image. Some of the thumbnails have a red/green overlay with a cross/tick icon, to show whether they've been rejected or approved. The app icon is also overlaid in the lower right-hand corner: a grayscale image of Pluto with a green border and a green tick overlaid."
%}

Most photos I review as *Approved* or *Rejected*, but I can also mark a photo as *Needs Action*.
I mark a photo this way when I need to do something with it, and I don't just want to keep it forever or delete it immediately -- useful, for example, for all the screenshots I've saved that should be turned into bug reports.

I can also add other categories.
In particular, I take a lot of photos of [my cross-stitch projects][cross-stitch], and I have an album with all of them.
I can add new photos to that album with one keystroke.

[cross-stitch]: /tags/cross-stitch/

---

I started with a prototype in Python, Flask, and JavaScript, which ran as a web app in my browser.
I could use the keyboard to navigate, and the Python app would run scripts written in Swift to modify my Photos library and retrieve the actual images.

{%
  picture
  filename="blink-web-app.png"
  width="750"
  alt="A similar layout to the previous app (full-sized image at the bottom, a horizontal list of thumbnails at the top), with a different set of images -- this time a grassy field on a sunny day. This app is running in a web browser, and the icons/colours are slightly different – various bits of border and spacing are slightly inconsistent, and it's not quite as polished."
%}

It proved the concept, but it was quite slow -- running Swift from Python introduces noticeable latency.
To fix the latency problem, I tossed around a bunch of ideas for some sort of persistently-running Swift process, or inventing a clever way for the Python server and Swift script to communicate -- for some reason I was trying to avoid writing a proper Mac app.

Writing Mac apps has always felt a bit intimidating, and I'm not sure why.
I think maybe I tried when I had much less experience, found it too hard, and the feeling stuck?
The last time I remember using Xcode, the language of choice was Objective-C -- which means this was pre-Swift, and that came out [nearly a decade ago][swift_history].

I've written a little Swift, and I know the modern way to write UIs for Apple platforms is SwiftUI, so I looked at [the SwiftUI tutorial][tutorial].
It's a pretty good tutorial, and I was able to follow it easily.
I've been using React for some front-end work in the last year or so, and I think that really helped -- I saw a lot of parallels between SwiftUI views and React components.
Some of the more complicated bits with @State and @Binding I don't think I've fully internalised yet, but I'll get there.

I bailed about halfway through the tutorial, and started writing my photo reviewing app.
I was pleasantly surprised at how quickly I could get something running, and I had the basic functionality within a few days.
There are lots of bugs and rough edges, but it kinda works.

One of the things I like about SwiftUI is the number of Apple-provided design resources I get to use "for free".
The red/green in the web app were fairly ugly CSS colours (#ff0000 and #008800); the red/green in the SwiftUI app are from Apple's professionally designed [system palette].
I've also got a chance to use [SF Symbols], their icon set, and most of the padding/spacing is just the defaults.
I really like how the app looks, and I think it's because I outsourced a lot of the design choices. 😅

[system palette]: https://developer.apple.com/design/human-interface-guidelines/color
[SF Symbols]: https://developer.apple.com/sf-symbols/

It's also pretty snappy; switching between photos or reviewing a picture are near-instant.
I used it after coming back from a short break in Ely, where I took several hundred photos, and I chewed through them all in a couple of hours.

I have no immediate plans to write about what I'm doing with Swift and SwiftUI, just because I'm still learning and I don't know what good/useful looks like yet.
(I have been learning what bad looks like!
My thumbnail picker is already on its fourth rewrite, because I kept writing implementations which were slow or broken.)

I'll write about some of it eventually, because I'll to keep using Swift and SwiftUI – now I've tried it, the prospect of creating other small utilities is too tempting.
This won't be my last Mac app.

[swift_history]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swift_(programming_language)#History
[tutorial]: https://developer.apple.com/tutorials/swiftui

---

The app is already good enough for me to review my photos on a day-to-day basis, even if it has some rough edges.
It's not ready for anyone else to use -- among other things, it'll probably crash if you don't use it with my Photos library -- but I'm going to keep improving it, as a fun learning exercise as much as anything else.

I might release proper binaries at some point, but in the meantime, everything is open-source and in [a public GitHub repository][github].
That includes the code, more documentation, and an explanation of why I chose the name and icon that I did.

[github]: https://github.com/alexwlchan/blink-photo-reviewer
