---
layout: post
date: 2023-12-19 10:33:36 +00:00
title: Setting up Fish to make virtualenv easier
summary: I wrote some shell config to smooth out the experience of using virtual environments in Python.
colors:
  index_light: "#13388f"
  index_dark:  "#edd347"
tags:
  - python
  - python:virtualenv
  - fish shell
card_attribution: |
  Yellow fish by Samarth Singhai on Pexels: https://www.pexels.com/photo/yellow-fish-in-close-up-photography-1145274/
  Used under the Pexels license; retrieved 18 December 2023.
---

Since I started my new job, I've been doing a lot more work in Python.
As I was starting with a completely clean slate, I wanted to try setting up Python the "right" way – or if not ["right"][xkcd], at least better way than my previous pile of hacks and kludges.

(I don't remember much of my old approach, but I know it was messy.
At one point I used Homebrew and virtual environments, but I got burnt by Homebrew unexpectedly breaking Python, so I scrapped it and started installing everything in my global Python installation.
Don't do that.)

In August I read Glyph's post [Get Your Mac Python From Python.org][glyph] and it all seemed like sensible advice, so I decided to use that as my starting point.
I downloaded Python on my new work laptop from Python.org, and I started using virtual environments for everything.

This worked well enough, but there were some rough edges in my new workflow.
I've been tweaking [my Fish shell config][fish] to make it a bit smoother.

[xkcd]: https://xkcd.com/1987/
[glyph]: https://blog.glyph.im/2023/08/get-your-mac-python-from-python-dot-org.html
[fish]: https://github.com/alexwlchan/scripts

---

## Setting the PIP_REQUIRE_VIRTUALENV variable

One recommendation in Glyph's post is that you [always use virtual environments][always], and they suggest a way to enforce that:

<style>
  blockquote pre {
    border: none;
    background: none;
    padding: 0;
    margin-left:  0;
    margin-right: 0;
  }
</style>

> Once you have installed Python from python.org, never `pip install` anything globally into that Python, even using the `--user` flag. Always, always use a virtual environment of some kind. In fact, I recommend configuring it so that it is not even possible to do so, by putting this in your `~/.pip/pip.conf`:
>
> ```
> [global]
> require-virtualenv = true
> ```

I like the idea of always using virtualenvs, but I'm not a fan of putting config files in my home directory.
I struggle to keep them up-to-date, and after a while I lose track of what's what – is this config still in use, or is it cruft from a tool I no longer use?
Plus, each config file becomes one more thing to remember when I set up a new computer.

Fortunately, this config file isn't the only way to ensure you always use a virtual environment.
You can also [set `PIP_REQUIRE_VIRTUALENV`][envvar], so I have the following lines in my [fish shell config]:

```shell
# This prevents me from installing packages with pip without being
# in a virtualenv first.
#
# This allows me to keep my system Python clean, and install all my
# packages inside virtualenvs.
#
# See https://docs.python-guide.org/dev/pip-virtualenv/#requiring-an-active-virtual-environment-for-pip
# See https://blog.glyph.im/2023/08/get-your-mac-python-from-python-dot-org.html#and-always-use-virtual-environments
#
set -g -x PIP_REQUIRE_VIRTUALENV true
```

Because I keep my shell config in Git, it's easier to see when I added this variable, and when I get a new computer I'll get this right behaviour "for free".

[always]: https://blog.glyph.im/2023/08/get-your-mac-python-from-python-dot-org.html#and-always-use-virtual-environments
[envvar]: https://docs.python-guide.org/dev/pip-virtualenv/#requiring-an-active-virtual-environment-for-pip
[fish shell config]: https://github.com/alexwlchan/scripts/blob/767df24a19000ae4db09d387dda76a8812acc985/config.fish#L10-L18

## A function to create and auto-enable new virtual environments

The process of creating new virtual environments is ostensibly simple – just two commands.

```console
$ python3 -m venv .venv
$ source .venv/bin/activate.fish
```

In practice I only ever remembered to run the first – I'd create my new virtual environment, go to `pip install` something, and then it would complain I hadn't enabled a virtual environment.
I'd mutter and grumble, activate the virtualenv, and try again.

If I'm creating a virtual environment, I want to use it immediately, so I wrapped this process in a Fish function called `venv`:

```shell
function venv --description "Create and activate a new virtual environment"
    echo "Creating virtual environment in "(pwd)"/.venv"
    python3 -m venv .venv --upgrade-deps
    source .venv/bin/activate.fish

    # Append .venv to the Git exclude file, but only if it's not
    # already there.
    if test -e .git
        set line_to_append ".venv"
        set target_file ".git/info/exclude"

        if not grep --quiet --fixed-strings --line-regexp "$line_to_append" "$target_file" 2>/dev/null
            echo "$line_to_append" >> "$target_file"
        end
    end

    # Tell Time Machine that it doesn't need to both backing up the
    # virtualenv directory. (macOS-only)
    # See https://ss64.com/mac/tmutil.html
    tmutil addexclusion .venv
end
```

I typically run this in the root of a project directory, usually a Git repo.

When I run it, it creates a new virtual environment with an up-to-date version of `pip` (thanks to `--upgrade-deps`), then it activates it immediately.
This means my next command can be a `pip install`, and it'll run inside the new virtualenv.

It also adds the `.venv` directory to `.git/info/exclude`, which is a local-only gitignore file.
This means that Git will ignore my virtual environment, and not try to save it.
The `grep` command is checking that I haven't already gitignore-d `.venv`, so I don't add repeated ignore rules.

It also tells Time Machine not to bother backing up the virtual environment directory.
I'd never restore a virtualenv from a backup; I'd just create a new one fresh, so backing it up is a waste of space and CPU cycles.

I often combine this with another function I have for creating temporary directories:

```shell
function tmpdir --description "Create and switch into a temporary directory"
    cd (mktemp -d)
end
```

like so:

```console
$ tmpdir; venv
```

And with two short commands, I'm in an empty directory with a fresh virtual environment.
This is great for quick prototyping, experiments, and one-off projects.

## Auto-activating virtual environments when I switch directories

Once I've created my virtual environments, I need to remember to activate them.

I could do this manually, or I could have the computer look for virtualenvs and (de)activate them automatically for me.
There are various plugins for doing this (I used [virtualfish] a few years ago), but this time round I realised my needs were simple enough that I could just write my own function.

My `venv` function ensures a standard approach to virtualenv naming: I always call them `.venv`, and I put them in the root of my project directories, which are always Git repos.
This means I can find if there's a virtualenv I want to auto-activate by looking to see if I'm in a Git repo, then looking for a folder called `.venv`.

This is the function:

```shell
function auto_activate_venv --on-variable PWD --description "Auto activate/deactivate virtualenv when I change directories"

    # Get the top-level directory of the current Git repo (if any)
    set REPO_ROOT (git rev-parse --show-toplevel 2>/dev/null)

    # Case #1: cd'd from a Git repo to a non-Git folder
    #
    # There's no virtualenv to activate, and we want to deactivate any
    # virtualenv which is already active.
    if test -z "$REPO_ROOT"; and test -n "$VIRTUAL_ENV"
        deactivate
    end

    # Case #2: cd'd folders within the same Git repo
    #
    # The virtualenv for this Git repo is already activated, so there's
    # nothing more to do.
    if [ "$VIRTUAL_ENV" = "$REPO_ROOT/.venv" ]
        return
    end

    # Case #3: cd'd from a non-Git folder into a Git repo
    #
    # If there's a virtualenv in the root of this repo, we should
    # activate it now.
    if [ -d "$REPO_ROOT/.venv" ]
        source "$REPO_ROOT/.venv/bin/activate.fish" &>/dev/null
    end
end
```

This function runs as an [event handler] in Fish – it runs whenever the `PWD` variable changes.
That variable is the current working directory, so in practice this runs whenever I change directories.

I find the top-level directory of the current Git repo by running [`git rev-parse --show-toplevel`][top_level], which is a super handy command I use in lots of scripts.
If I'm not in a Git repo, it returns an empty string.
Then I compare that to the path of the currently-enabled virtualenv in `VIRTUAL_ENV`, and decide whether I need to activate or deactivate a virtualenv.

[virtualfish]: https://virtualfish.readthedocs.io/en/latest/plugins.html#auto-activation-auto-activation
[event handler]: https://fishshell.com/docs/current/language.html#event
[top_level]: https://git-scm.com/docs/git-rev-parse

---

If you want the complete code, my Fish shell config is [in a public repo][repo], although the virtualenv stuff is a bit spread out.

[repo]: https://github.com/alexwlchan/scripts
[simon]: https://simonwillison.net/2023/Mar/27/ai-enhanced-development/
