---
layout: post
title: Gumdrop, a silly app for messing with my webcam
date: 2026-02-17 23:09:01 +00:00
topic: Fun stuff
---
During the COVID lockdowns, I spent long evenings at home on my own, and I amused myself by dressing up in extravagant and glamorous clothing.
One dark night, I realised I could use my home working setup to have some fun, with just a webcam and a monitor.

I turned off every light in my office, cranked up my monitor to max brightness, then I used it to turn my room red or green or pink.
Despite the terrible image quality, I enjoyed looking at myself in the webcam as my outfits took on a vivid new hue.

Here are three pictures with my current office lit up in different colours, each with a distinct vibe:

<figure style="display: grid; grid-template-columns: repeat(3, 1fr); gap: var(--grid-gap)">
  {%
    picture
    filename="gumdrop_red.png"
    width="250"
  %}
  {%
    picture
    filename="gumdrop_green.png"
    width="250"
  %}
  {%
    picture
    filename="gumdrop_blue.png"
    width="250"
  %}
</figure>

For a while I was using Keynote to change my screen colour, and Photo Booth to use the webcam.
It worked, but juggling two apps was clunky, and a bunch of the screen was taken up with toolbars or UI that diluted the colour.

Then I remembered that I'm a software developer, and I can build my own tools.
I found an MDN tutorial which explains [how to use the webcam from an HTML page][mdn-tutorial].
I learnt about using cameras on the web, taking pictures, and mirroring the image.

My new page is mostly a solid colour background, with a small preview from the webcam, and buttons to take a picture or change the background colour.
It's a fun little toy, and it's lived on my desktop ever since.
The whole thing is less than 200 lines, most of which comes from the MDN sample code.

Here's a screenshot:

{%
  picture
  filename="gumdrop-screenshot.png"
  width="750"
%}

If you want to play with it yourself, turn out the lights, crank up the screen brightness, and visit [alexwlchan.net/fun-stuff/gumdrop.html](/fun-stuff/gumdrop.html).
All the camera processing runs locally, so it never leaves your browser -- I don't see your pictures, and I don't want to.

I'm not going to explain how the code works -- if you're interested, read the [MDN tutorial][mdn-tutorial] I started with.

The picture qaulity on my webcam is atrocious, even more so in a poorly-lit room, but I had a lot of fun with this.
One thing I discovered is that I prefer this with my desktop webcam rather than my iPhone -- the iPhone is a better camera, but it does more aggressive colour correction.
That makes the pictures less goofy, which ruins the fun!

I don't play dress up as much as I used to, but on occasion I'll still break it out and amuse myself by seeing what I look like in deep blue, or vivid green, or hot pink.
It's also how I took one of my favourite pictures of myself, a witchy vibe I'd love to capture more often:

{%
  picture
  filename="gumdrop-witchy.jpg"
  width="750"
%}

[mdn-tutorial]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Media_Capture_and_Streams_API/Taking_still_photos

Computers can be used for serious work, but they can do silly stuff as well.
