---
layout: article
title: Gumdrop, a silly app for messing with my webcam
summary: When it's dark, a large computer monitor is a fun way to make the room change into different colours.
date: 2026-03-05 08:58:35 +00:00
topics: 
  - Fun stuff
  - Computers and code
---
During the COVID lockdowns, I spent long evenings at home on my own, and I amused myself by dressing up in extravagant and glamorous clothing.
One dark night, I realised I could use my home working setup to have some fun, with just a webcam and a monitor.

I turned off every light in my office, cranked up my monitor to max brightness, then I changed the colour on the screen to turn my room red or green or pink.
Despite the terrible image quality, I enjoyed looking at myself in the webcam as my outfits took on a vivid new hue.

Here are three pictures with my current office lit up in different colours, each with a distinct vibe:

<figure style="display: grid; grid-template-columns: repeat(3, 1fr); gap: var(--grid-gap)">
  {%
    picture
    filename="gumdrop_red.png"
    width="250"
    alt="A photo of me in a red room. Most of the background has faded to dark red, and my face is glowing red in the middle of the frame."
  %}
  {%
    picture
    filename="gumdrop_green.png"
    width="250"
    alt="A photo of me in a green room. The background is more visible, a shade of clover green, while my face looks positively radioactive."
  %}
  {%
    picture
    filename="gumdrop_blue.png"
    width="250"
    alt="A photo of me in a blue room. Everything is dark and moody, like in a sci-fi film."
  %}
</figure>

For a while I was using Keynote to change my screen colour, and Photo Booth to use the webcam.
It worked, but juggling two apps was clunky, and a bunch of the screen was taken up with toolbars or UI that diluted the colour.

To make it easier, I built a tiny web app that helps me take these silly pictures.
It's mostly a solid colour background, with a small preview from the webcam, and buttons to take a picture or change the background colour.
It's a fun little toy, and it's lived on my desktop ever since.

Here's a screenshot:

{%
  picture
  filename="gumdrop-screenshot.png"
  width="750"
  alt="Screenshot of a web page which is mostly hot pink, with two small inline pictures of me in my office. One picture is very pink (the current view) and the other is less pink (a photo taken a few seconds prior). Below the current view are three buttons to allow camera permissions, take a picture, and change the colour."
%}

If you want to play with it yourself, turn out the lights, crank up the screen brightness, and visit [alexwlchan.net/fun-stuff/gumdrop.html](/fun-stuff/gumdrop.html).
All the camera processing runs locally, so the webcam feed is completely private -- your pictures are never sent to me or my server.

The picture quality on my webcam is atrocious, even more so in a poorly-lit room, but that's all part of the fun.
One thing I discovered is that I prefer this with my desktop webcam rather than my iPhone -- the iPhone is a better camera, but it does more aggressive colour correction.
That makes the pictures less goofy, which defeats the purpose!

I'm not going to explain how the code works -- most of it comes from an MDN tutorial which explains [how to use a webcam from an HTML page][mdn-tutorial], so I'd recommend reading that.

I don't play dress up as much as I used to, but on occasion I'll still break it out and amuse myself by seeing what I look like in deep blue, or vivid green, or hot pink.
It's also how I took one of my favourite pictures of myself, a witchy vibe I'd love to capture more often:

{%
  picture
  filename="gumdrop-witchy.jpg"
  width="750"
  alt="A picture of me smiling at the camera from inside my office. The room is lit up in a moody green, I have dark lipstick and a dark dress, and some cat ears vaguely visible. I am absolutely beaming with joy."
%}

[mdn-tutorial]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Media_Capture_and_Streams_API/Taking_still_photos

Computers can be used for serious work, but they can do silly stuff as well.
