---
layout: post
date: 2018-09-13 16:53:55 +0000
title: PyCon UK 2018
tags: pyconuk
summary: "It's almost time for this year's PyCon UK. What I'm doing, where to find me, how to have fun."
category: "Organising PyCon UK"
---

I'm sitting in Gorsedd Gardens, a stone's throw from Cardiff City Hall.
In my hand I have a fresh cup of Brodies coffee.
In front of me is a bed of pink flowers, and an over-excitable squirrel.
There's a water fountain and a seagull behind me.
Everything is quiet.

For now.

I'm back in Cardiff for [PyCon UK 2018](https://2018.pyconuk.org).
This is my third year helping to organise the conference.
Tomorrow is the set-up and A/V installation, and the conference itself starts on Saturday -- the most hectic weekend of my year.
It's also one of the most fun -- I've only been in Cardiff for an hour, and I'm already grinning at the thought of the long days ahead.
The UK Python community is a lovely bunch of people, and it's great to have so many of them in one place.

I'm doing three sessions this year:

*   Saturday @ 9:30, Assembly Room (keynote) -- [*Building Trust in an Age of Suspicious Minds*](https://2018.hq.pyconuk.org/schedule/item/794C/).

*   Sunday @ 11:30, Assembly Room (talk) -- [*Assume Worst Intent: Designing Against the Abusive Ex*](https://2018.hq.pyconuk.org/schedule/item/54DC/).

*   Monday @ 11:30, Room L (workshop) -- [*A Plumber's Guide to Git*](https://2018.hq.pyconuk.org/schedule/item/E725/).

I'll update that list with links to slides and notes soon after the conference.

If you're around, please do come and say hi, even if I look busy or shy!
I'm never too busy for a chat, especially if you're a first timer.
And I'm sure all the other organisers would agree -- it makes all the difference when somebody comes up to us and makes feel like our work was worthwhile.

Whether or not we run into each other, I hope you have a lovely conference.

~ Alex x
