---
layout: post
date: 2022-08-03 19:36:16 +00:00
title: Cut the cutesy errors
summary: If your app has just ruined my day, I need help, not humour.
tags:
  - error messages
---

I had to get a train ticket today, which is a two-step process.
First I buy the ticket, then I download an e-ticket with a QR code that I scan at the gates.
Normally this works fine, and I buy the ticket on my way to the station.
Today, Trainline had other ideas:

{%
  picture
  filename="guest_headers.png"
  alt="An error message dialog. ‘This is awkward. Token not provided in guest headers.’"
  width="562"
%}

They could take my money!
They just couldn't give me a ticket.

Frustrating as this was, it was made worse by the error message.

*"This is awkward"* is what you say when two people show up to a party in the same outfit; this was far more than that.
I was worried that I was about to miss my train, and annoyed at having to buy a replacement ticket – and the cutesy error message felt like somebody was trivialising my troubles.

And the explanatory text is completely useless: *"Token not provided in guest headers."*
I have no idea what this means, or what I can do about it.
Will it work if I try again?
Do I have a ticket for my return journey?
Should I call support?
Or is this ticket completely hosed?

**Be very careful about humourous error messages.**
You need to think about how somebody will be feeling when something goes wrong.
What seems fun and light-hearted in your office may read very differently when you've just ruined somebody's day.

There are certain classes of app where an unexpected error can cause a lot of stress: transport, telephony, and finance all spring to mind.
Imagine someone who's just missed a plane, had an important call cut out, or can't get money out of their bank account.
How are they feeling?
Will they appreciate your attempt at humour?

There's a place for humour and levity in software, and my code has plenty -- but error messages are rarely it.
**If somebody hits an error, they're some mix of anxious, angry, or confused, and cute or unclear language does nothing to help.**

Error messages are [incredibly important](/2020/the-importance-of-good-error-messages/), and the software industry generally does a bad job of writing them.
Good error messages explain what's gone wrong, and give clear instructions for what to do next -- and being cutesy rarely helps.

*This post was adapted from [a thread on Twitter](https://twitter.com/alexwlchan/status/1554723537562357760).*
